# Contributing to DataLad

[gh-datalad]: http://github.com/datalad/datalad

## Files organization

- [datalad/](./datalad) is the main Python module where major development is happening,
  with major submodules being:
    - `cmdline/` - helpers for accessing `interface/` functionality from
     command line
    - `customremotes/` - custom special remotes for annex provided by datalad
    - `downloaders/` - support for accessing data from various sources (e.g.
      http, S3, XNAT) via a unified interface.
        - `configs/` - specifications for known data providers and associated
          credentials
    - `interface/` - high level interface functions which get exposed via
      command line (`cmdline/`) or Python (`datalad.api`).
    - `tests/` - some unit- and regression- tests (more could be found under
      `tests/` of corresponding submodules. See [Tests](#tests))
        - [utils.py](./datalad/tests/utils.py) provides convenience helpers used by unit-tests such as
          `@with_tree`, `@serve_path_via_http` and other decorators
    - `ui/` - user-level interactions, such as messages about errors, warnings,
      progress reports, AND when supported by available frontend --
      interactive dialogs
    - `support/` - various support modules, e.g. for git/git-annex interfaces,
      constraints for the `interface/`, etc
- [benchmarks/](./benchmarks) - [asv] benchmarks suite (see [Benchmarking](#benchmarking))
- [docs/](./docs) - yet to be heavily populated documentation
    - `bash-completions` - bash and zsh completion setup for datalad (just
      `source` it)
- [fixtures/](./fixtures) currently not under git, contains generated by vcr fixtures
- [sandbox/](./sandbox) - various scripts and prototypes which are not part of
  the main/distributed with releases codebase
- [tools/](./tools) contains helper utilities used during development, testing, and
  benchmarking of DataLad.  Implemented in any most appropriate language
  (Python, bash, etc.)

Whenever a new top-level file or folder is added to the repository, it should
be listed in `MANIFEST.in` so that it will be either included in or excluded
from source distributions as appropriate.  [See
here](https://packaging.python.org/guides/using-manifest-in/) for information
about writing a `MANIFEST.in`.

## How to contribute

The preferred way to contribute to the DataLad code base is
to fork the [main repository][gh-datalad] on GitHub.  Here
we outline the workflow used by the developers:


0. Have a clone of our main [project repository][gh-datalad] as `origin`
   remote in your git:

          git clone git://github.com/datalad/datalad

1. Fork the [project repository][gh-datalad]: click on the 'Fork'
   button near the top of the page.  This creates a copy of the code
   base under your account on the GitHub server.

2. Add your forked clone as a remote to the local clone you already have on your
   local disk:

          git remote add gh-YourLogin git@github.com:YourLogin/datalad.git
          git fetch gh-YourLogin

    To ease addition of other github repositories as remotes, here is
    a little bash function/script to add to your `~/.bashrc`:

        ghremote () {
                url="$1"
                proj=${url##*/}
                url_=${url%/*}
                login=${url_##*/}
                git remote add gh-$login $url
                git fetch gh-$login
        }

    thus you could simply run:

         ghremote git@github.com:YourLogin/datalad.git

    to add the above `gh-YourLogin` remote.  Additional handy aliases
    such as `ghpr` (to fetch existing pr from someone's remote) and 
    `ghsendpr` could be found at [yarikoptic's bash config file](http://git.onerussian.com/?p=etc/bash.git;a=blob;f=.bash/bashrc/30_aliases_sh;hb=HEAD#l865)

3. Create a branch (generally off the `origin/master`) to hold your changes:

          git checkout -b nf-my-feature

    and start making changes. Ideally, use a prefix signaling the purpose of the
    branch
    - `nf-` for new features
    - `bf-` for bug fixes
    - `rf-` for refactoring
    - `doc-` for documentation contributions (including in the code docstrings).
    - `bm-` for changes to benchmarks
    We recommend to not work in the ``master`` branch!

4. Work on this copy on your computer using Git to do the version control. When
   you're done editing, do:

          git add modified_files
          git commit

   to record your changes in Git.  Ideally, prefix your commit messages with the
   `NF`, `BF`, `RF`, `DOC`, `BM` similar to the branch name prefixes, but you could
   also use `TST` for commits concerned solely with tests, and `BK` to signal
   that the commit causes a breakage (e.g. of tests) at that point.  Multiple
   entries could be listed joined with a `+` (e.g. `rf+doc-`).  See `git log` for
   examples.  If a commit closes an existing DataLad issue, then add to the end
   of the message `(Closes #ISSUE_NUMER)`

5. Push to GitHub with:

          git push -u gh-YourLogin nf-my-feature

   Finally, go to the web page of your fork of the DataLad repo, and click
   'Pull request' (PR) to send your changes to the maintainers for review. This
   will send an email to the committers.  You can commit new changes to this branch
   and keep pushing to your remote -- github automagically adds them to your
   previously opened PR.

(If any of the above seems like magic to you, then look up the
[Git documentation](http://git-scm.com/documentation) on the web.)

## Development environment

We support Python 3 only (>= 3.7).

See [README.md:Dependencies](README.md#Dependencies) for basic information
about installation of datalad itself.
On Debian-based systems we recommend to enable [NeuroDebian](http://neuro.debian.net)
since we use it to provide backports of recent fixed external modules we depend upon:

```sh
apt-get install -y -q git git-annex-standalone
apt-get install -y -q patool python3-scrapy python3-{argcomplete,git,humanize,keyring,lxml,msgpack,progressbar,requests,setuptools}
```

and additionally, for development we suggest to use tox and new
versions of dependencies from pypy:

```sh
apt-get install -y -q python3-{dev,httpretty,nose,pip,vcr,virtualenv} python3-tox
# Some libraries which might be needed for installing via pip
apt-get install -y -q lib{ffi,ssl,curl4-openssl,xml2,xslt1}-dev
```

some of which you could also install from PyPi using pip  (prior installation of those libraries listed above
might be necessary)

```sh
pip install -r requirements-devel.txt
```

and you will need to install recent git-annex using appropriate for your
OS means (for Debian/Ubuntu, once again, just use NeuroDebian).

Contributor Files History
-------------------------

The original repository provided a [.zenodo.json](.zenodo.json)
file, and we generate a [.contributors file](.all-contributorsrc) from that via:

```bash
pip install tributors
tributors --version
0.0.18
```

It helps to have a GitHub token to increase API limits:

```bash
export GITHUB_TOKEN=xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
```

Instructions for these environment variables can be found [here](https://con.github.io/tributors/docs/getting-started#2-environment). 
Then update zenodo:

```bash
tributors update  zenodo
INFO:    zenodo:Updating .zenodo.json
INFO:    zenodo:Updating .tributors cache from .zenodo.json
WARNING:tributors:zenodo does not support updating from names.
```

In the case that there is more than one orcid found for a user, you will be given a list
to check. Others will be updated in the file. You can then curate the file as you see fit.
We next want to add the .allcontributors file:

```bash
$ tributors init allcontrib
INFO:allcontrib:Generating .all-contributorsrc for datalad/datalad
$ tributors update allcontrib
INFO:allcontrib:Updating .all-contributorsrc
INFO:allcontrib:Updating .tributors cache from .all-contributorsrc
INFO:allcontrib:⭐️ Found new contributor glalteva in .all-contributorsrc
INFO:allcontrib:⭐️ Found new contributor adswa in .all-contributorsrc
INFO:allcontrib:⭐️ Found new contributor chrhaeusler in .all-contributorsrc
...
INFO:allcontrib:⭐️ Found new contributor bpoldrack in .all-contributorsrc
INFO:allcontrib:⭐️ Found new contributor yetanothertestuser in .all-contributorsrc
WARNING:tributors:allcontrib does not support updating from orcids.
WARNING:tributors:allcontrib does not support updating from email.
```

We can then populate the shared .tributors file:

```bash
$ tributors update-lookup allcontrib
```

And then we can rely on the [GitHub action](.github/workflows/update-contributors.yml) to update contributors. The action is set to run on merges to master, meaning when the contributions are finalized. This means that we add new contributors, and we
look for new orcids as we did above.


## Documentation

### Docstrings

We use [NumPy standard] for the description of parameters docstrings.  If you are using
PyCharm, set your project settings (`Tools` -> `Python integrated tools` -> `Docstring format`).

[NumPy standard]: https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/master/doc/HOWTO_DOCUMENT.rst.txt#docstring-standard

In addition, we follow the guidelines of [Restructured Text] with the additional features and treatments
provided by [Sphinx].

[Restructured Text]: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/user/rst/quickstart.html
[Sphinx]: http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/

## Additional Hints

### Merge commits

For merge commits to have more informative description, add to your
`.git/config` or `~/.gitconfig` following section:

    [merge]
    log = true

and if conflicts occur, provide short summary on how they were resolved
in "Conflicts" listing within the merge commit
(see [example](https://github.com/datalad/datalad/commit/eb062a8009d160ae51929998771964738636dcc2)).


## Quality Assurance

It is recommended to check that your contribution complies with the following
rules before submitting a pull request:

- All public methods should have informative docstrings with sample usage
  presented as doctests when appropriate.

- All other tests pass when everything is rebuilt from scratch.

- New code should be accompanied by tests.


### Tests

`datalad/tests` contains tests for the core portion of the project, and
more tests are provided under corresponding submodules in `tests/`
subdirectories to simplify re-running the tests concerning that portion
of the codebase.  To execute many tests, the codebase first needs to be
"installed" in order to generate scripts for the entry points.  For
that, the recommended course of action is to use `virtualenv`, e.g.

```sh
virtualenv --system-site-packages venv-tests
source venv-tests/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
python setup.py develop
```

and then use that virtual environment to run the tests, via

```sh
python -m nose -s -v datalad
```

or similarly,

```sh
nosetests -s -v datalad
```

then to later deactivate the virtualenv just simply enter

```sh
deactivate
```

**Note**: on Windows, please add `--traverse-namespace` option to the `nose`
call, or otherwise `nose` would not discover tests.

Alternatively, or complimentary to that, you can use `tox` -- there is a `tox.ini`
file which sets up a few virtual environments for testing locally, which you can
later reuse like any other regular virtualenv for troubleshooting.
Additionally, [tools/testing/test_README_in_docker](tools/testing/test_README_in_docker) script can
be used to establish a clean docker environment (based on any NtesteuroDebian-supported
release of Debian or Ubuntu) with all dependencies listed in README.md pre-installed.

#### Test attributes

[datalad/tests/utils.py]() defines many useful decorators. Some of those just to annotate tests
for various aspects to allow for easy sub-selection.

##### Speed

Please annotate with following decorators
- `@slow` if test runs over 10 seconds
- `@turtle` if test runs over 120 seconds (those would not typically be ran on CIs)

##### Purpose

As those tests also usually tend to be slower, use in conjunction with `@slow` or `@turtle` when slow
- `@integration` - tests verifying correct operation with external tools/services beyond git/git-annex
- `@usecase` - represents some (user) use-case, and not necessarily a "unit-test" of functionality

### CI setup

We are using Travis-CI and have [buildbot setup](https://github.com/datalad/buildbot) which also
exercises our tests battery for every PR and on the master.  Note that buildbot runs tests only submitted
by datalad developers, or if a PR acquires 'buildbot' label.

In case if you want to enter buildbot's environment

1. Login to our development server (`smaug`)

2. Find container ID associated with the environment you are interested in, e.g.

        docker ps | grep nd16.04

3. Enter that docker container environment using

        docker exec -it <CONTAINER ID> /bin/bash

4. Become buildbot user

        su - buildbot

5. Activate corresponding virtualenv using

        source <VENV/bin/activate>

   e.g. `source /home/buildbot/datalad-pr-docker-dl-nd15_04/build/venv-ci/bin/activate`

And now you should be in the same environment as the very last tested PR.
Note that the same path/venv is reused for all the PRs, so you might want
first to check using `git show` under the `build/` directory if it corresponds
to the commit you are interested to troubleshoot.

For developing on Windows you can use free [Windows VMs](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/tools/vms/).

### Coverage

You can also check for common programming errors with the following tools:

- Code with good unittest coverage (at least 80%), check with:

          pip install nose coverage
          nosetests --with-coverage path/to/tests_for_package

- We rely on https://codecov.io to provide convenient view of code coverage.
  Installation of the codecov extension for Firefox/Iceweasel or Chromium
  is strongly advised, since it provides coverage annotation of pull
  requests.

### Linting

We are not (yet) fully PEP8 compliant, so please use these tools as
guidelines for your contributions, but not to PEP8 entire code
base.

[beyond-pep8]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wf-BqAjZb8M

*Sidenote*: watch [Raymond Hettinger - Beyond PEP 8][beyond-pep8]

- No pyflakes warnings, check with:

           pip install pyflakes
           pyflakes path/to/module.py

- No PEP8 warnings, check with:

           pip install pep8
           pep8 path/to/module.py

- AutoPEP8 can help you fix some of the easy redundant errors:

           pip install autopep8
           autopep8 path/to/pep8.py

Also, some team developers use
[PyCharm community edition](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm) which
provides built-in PEP8 checker and handy tools such as smart
splits/joins making it easier to maintain code following the PEP8
recommendations.  NeuroDebian provides `pycharm-community-sloppy`
package to ease pycharm installation even further.

### Benchmarking

We use [asv] to benchmark some core DataLad functionality.
The benchmarks suite is located under [benchmarks/](./benchmarks), and
periodically we publish results of running benchmarks on a dedicated host
to http://datalad.github.io/datalad/ .  Those results are collected
and available under the `.asv/` submodule of this repository, so to get started

- `git submodule update --init .asv`
- `pip install .[devel]` or just `pip install asv`
- `asv machine` - to configure asv for your host if you want to run
  benchmarks locally

And then you could use [asv] in multiple ways.

#### Quickly benchmark the working tree

- `asv run -E existing` - benchmark using the existing python environment
  and just print out results (not stored anywhere).  You can add `-q`
  to run each benchmark just once (thus less reliable estimates)
- `asv run -b api.supers.time_createadd_to_dataset -E existing`
  would run that specific benchmark using the existing python environment

Note: `--python=same` (`-E existing`) seems to have restricted
applicability, e.g. can't be used for a range of commits, so it can't
be used with `continuous`.

#### Compare results for two commits from recorded runs

Use [asv compare] to compare results from different runs, which should be
available under `.asv/results/<machine>`.  (Note that the example
below passes ref names instead of commit IDs, which requires asv v0.3
or later.)

```shell
> asv compare -m hopa maint master

All benchmarks:

       before           after         ratio
     [b619eca4]       [7635f467]
-           1.87s            1.54s     0.82  api.supers.time_createadd
-           1.85s            1.56s     0.84  api.supers.time_createadd_to_dataset
-           5.57s            4.40s     0.79  api.supers.time_installr
          145±6ms          145±6ms     1.00  api.supers.time_ls
-           4.59s            2.17s     0.47  api.supers.time_remove
          427±1ms          434±8ms     1.02  api.testds.time_create_test_dataset1
-           4.10s            3.37s     0.82  api.testds.time_create_test_dataset2x2
      1.81±0.07ms      1.73±0.04ms     0.96  core.runner.time_echo
       2.30±0.2ms      2.04±0.03ms    ~0.89  core.runner.time_echo_gitrunner
+        420±10ms          535±3ms     1.27  core.startup.time_help_np
          111±6ms          107±3ms     0.96  core.startup.time_import
+         334±6ms          466±4ms     1.39  core.startup.time_import_api
```


#### Run and compare results for two commits

[asv continuous] could be used to first run benchmarks for the to-be-tested
commits and then provide stats:

- `asv continuous maint master` - would run and compare `maint` and `master` branches
- `asv continuous HEAD` - would compare `HEAD` against `HEAD^`
- `asv continuous master HEAD` - would compare `HEAD` against state of master
- [TODO: contineous -E existing](https://github.com/airspeed-velocity/asv/issues/338#issuecomment-380520022)

Notes:
- only significant changes will be reported
- raw results from benchmarks are not stored (use `--record-samples` if
  desired)

#### Run and record benchmarks results (for later comparison etc)

- `asv run` would run all configured branches (see
  [asv.conf.json](./asv.conf.json))


#### Profile a benchmark and produce a nice graph visualization

Example (replace with the benchmark of interest)

    asv profile -v -o profile.gprof usecases.study_forrest.time_make_studyforrest_mockup
    gprof2dot -f pstats profile.gprof | dot -Tpng -o profile.png \
        && xdg-open profile.png

#### Common options

- `-E` to restrict to specific environment, e.g. `-E virtualenv:2.7`
- `-b` could be used to specify specific benchmark(s)
- `-q` to run benchmark just once for a quick assessment (results are
  not stored since too unreliable)


[asv compare]: http://asv.readthedocs.io/en/latest/commands.html#asv-compare
[asv continuous]: http://asv.readthedocs.io/en/latest/commands.html#asv-continuous

[asv]: http://asv.readthedocs.io


## Easy Issues

A great way to start contributing to DataLad is to pick an item from the list of
[Easy issues](https://github.com/datalad/datalad/labels/easy) in the issue
tracker.  Resolving these issues allows you to start contributing to the project
without much prior knowledge.  Your assistance in this area will be greatly
appreciated by the more experienced developers as it helps free up their time to
concentrate on other issues.

## Recognizing contributions

We welcome and recognize all contributions from documentation to testing to code development.

You can see a list of current contributors in our [zenodo file][link_zenodo].
If you are new to the project, don't forget to add your name and affiliation there!
We also have an .all-contributorsrc that is updated automatically on merges. Once it's
merged, if you helped in a non standard way (e.g., a contribution other than code)
you can open a pull request to add any [All Contributors Emoji][contrib_emoji] that
match your contribution types.

## Thank you!

You're awesome. :wave::smiley:



# Various hints for developers

## Useful tools

- While performing IO/net heavy operations use [dstat](http://dag.wieers.com/home-made/dstat)
  for quick logging of various health stats in a separate terminal window:
  
        dstat -c --top-cpu -d --top-bio --top-latency --net

- To monitor speed of any data pipelining [pv](http://www.ivarch.com/programs/pv.shtml) is really handy,
  just plug it in the middle of your pipe.

- For remote debugging epdb could be used (avail in pip) by using
  `import epdb; epdb.serve()` in Python code and then connecting to it with
  `python -c "import epdb; epdb.connect()".`

- We are using codecov which has extensions for the popular browsers
  (Firefox, Chrome) which annotates pull requests on github regarding changed coverage.

## Useful Environment Variables

Refer datalad/config.py for information on how to add these environment variables to the config file and their naming convention

- *DATALAD_DATASETS_TOPURL*:
  Used to point to an alternative location for `///` dataset. If running
  tests preferred to be set to https://datasets-tests.datalad.org
- *DATALAD_LOG_LEVEL*:
  Used for control the verbosity of logs printed to stdout while running datalad commands/debugging
- *DATALAD_LOG_NAME*:
  Whether to include logger name (e.g. `datalad.support.sshconnector`) in the log
- *DATALAD_LOG_OUTPUTS*:
  Used to control either both stdout and stderr of external commands execution are logged in detail (at DEBUG level)
- *DATALAD_LOG_PID*
  To instruct datalad to log PID of the process
- *DATALAD_LOG_TARGET*
  Where to log: `stderr` (default), `stdout`, or another filename
- *DATALAD_LOG_TIMESTAMP*:
  Used to add timestamp to datalad logs
- *DATALAD_LOG_TRACEBACK*:
  Runs TraceBack function with collide set to True, if this flag is set to 'collide'.
  This replaces any common prefix between current traceback log and previous invocation with "..."
- *DATALAD_LOG_VMEM*:
  Reports memory utilization (resident/virtual) at every log line, needs `psutil` module
- *DATALAD_EXC_STR_TBLIMIT*: 
  This flag is used by datalad to cap the number of traceback steps included in exception logging and result reporting to DATALAD_EXC_STR_TBLIMIT of pre-processed entries from traceback.
- *DATALAD_SEED*:
  To seed Python's `random` RNG, which will also be used for generation of dataset UUIDs to make
  those random values reproducible.  You might want also to set all the relevant git config variables
  like we do in one of the travis runs
- *DATALAD_TESTS_TEMP_KEEP*: 
  Function rmtemp will not remove temporary file/directory created for testing if this flag is set
- *DATALAD_TESTS_TEMP_DIR*: 
  Create a temporary directory at location specified by this flag.
  It is used by tests to create a temporary git directory while testing git annex archives etc
- *DATALAD_TESTS_NONETWORK*: 
  Skips network tests completely if this flag is set
  Examples include test for s3, git_repositories, openfmri etc
- *DATALAD_TESTS_SSH*: 
  Skips SSH tests if this flag is **not** set.  If you enable this,
  you need to set up a "datalad-test" and "datalad-test2" target in
  your SSH configuration.  The second target is used by only a couple
  of tests, so depending on the tests you're interested in, you can
  get by with only "datalad-test" configured.

  A Docker image that is used for DataLad's tests is available at
  <https://github.com/datalad-tester/docker-ssh-target>.  Note that
  the DataLad tests assume that target files exist in
  `DATALAD_TESTS_TEMP_DIR`, which restricts the "datalad-test" target
  to being either the localhost or a container that mounts
  `DATALAD_TESTS_TEMP_DIR`.
- *DATALAD_TESTS_NOTEARDOWN*: 
  Does not execute teardown_package which cleans up temp files and directories created by tests if this flag is set
- *DATALAD_TESTS_USECASSETTE*:
  Specifies the location of the file to record network transactions by the VCR module.
  Currently used by when testing custom special remotes
- *DATALAD_TESTS_OBSCURE_PREFIX*:
  A string to prefix the most obscure (but supported by the filesystem test filename
- *DATALAD_TESTS_PROTOCOLREMOTE*:
  Binary flag to specify whether to test protocol interactions of custom remote with annex
- *DATALAD_TESTS_RUNCMDLINE*:
  Binary flag to specify if shell testing using shunit2 to be carried out
- *DATALAD_TESTS_TEMP_FS*:
  Specify the temporary file system to use as loop device for testing DATALAD_TESTS_TEMP_DIR creation
- *DATALAD_TESTS_TEMP_FSSIZE*:
  Specify the size of temporary file system to use as loop device for testing DATALAD_TESTS_TEMP_DIR creation
- *DATALAD_TESTS_NONLO*:
  Specifies network interfaces to bring down/up for testing. Currently used by travis.
- *DATALAD_TESTS_KNOWNFAILURES_PROBE*:
  Binary flag to test whether "known failures" still actually are failures. That
  is - change behavior of tests, that decorated with any of the `known_failure`,
  to not skip, but executed and *fail* if they would pass (indicating that the
  decorator may be removed/reconsidered).
- *DATALAD_CMD_PROTOCOL*:
  Specifies the protocol number used by the Runner to note shell command or python function call times and allows for dry runs.
  'externals-time' for ExecutionTimeExternalsProtocol, 'time' for ExecutionTimeProtocol and 'null' for NullProtocol.
  Any new DATALAD_CMD_PROTOCOL has to implement datalad.support.protocol.ProtocolInterface
- *DATALAD_CMD_PROTOCOL_PREFIX*:
  Sets a prefix to add before the command call times are noted by DATALAD_CMD_PROTOCOL.
- *DATALAD_USE_DEFAULT_GIT*:
  Instructs to use `git` as available in current environment, and not the one which possibly comes with git-annex (default behavior).
- *DATALAD_ASSERT_NO_OPEN_FILES*:
  Instructs test helpers to check for open files at the end of a test. If set, remaining open files are logged at ERROR level. Alternative modes are: "assert" (raise AssertionError if any open file is found), "pdb"/"epdb" (drop into debugger when open files are found, info on files is provided in a "files" dictionary, mapping filenames to psutil process objects).
- *DATALAD_ALLOW_FAIL*:
  Instructs `@never_fail` decorator to allow to fail, e.g. to ease debugging.

# Release(s) workflow

## Branches

- `master`: changes toward the next `MAJOR.MINOR.0` release.
  Release candidates (tagged with an `rcX` suffix) are cut from this branch
- `maint`: bug fixes for the latest released `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`
- `maint-MAJOR.MINOR`: generally not used, unless some bug fix release with a critical bug fix is needed.

## Workflow

- upon release of `MAJOR.MINOR.0`, `maint` branch needs to be fast-forwarded to that release
- bug fixes to functionality released within the `maint` branch should be
  submitted against `maint` branch
- cherry-picking fixes from `master` into `maint` is allowed where needed
- `master` branch accepts PRs with new functionality
- `master` branch merges `maint` as frequently as needed

## Helpers

[Makefile](./Makefile) provides a number of useful `make` targets:

- `linkissues-changelog`: converts `(#ISSUE)` placeholders into proper markdown within [CHANGELOG.md]()
- `update-changelog`: uses above `linkissues-changelog` and updates .rst changelog
- `release-pypi`: ensures no `dist/` exists yet, creates a wheel and a source distribution and uploads to pypi.

## Releasing with GitHub Actions, auto, and pull requests

New releases of datalad are created via a GitHub Actions workflow built
around [`auto`](https://github.com/intuit/auto).  Whenever a pull request is
merged into `maint` that has the "`release`" label, `auto` updates the
changelog based on the pull requests since the last release, commits the
results, tags the new commit with the next version number, and creates a GitHub
release for the tag.  This in turn triggers a job for building an sdist & wheel
for the project and uploading them to PyPI.

### Labelling pull requests

The section that `auto` adds to the changelog on a new release consists of the
titles of all pull requests merged into master since the previous release,
organized by label.  `auto` recognizes the following PR labels:

- `semver-minor` — for changes corresponding to an increase in the minor version
  component
- `semver-patch` — for changes corresponding to an increase in the patch/micro version
  component; this is the default label for unlabelled PRs
- `semver-internal` — for changes only affecting the internal API
- `semver-documentation` — for changes only affecting the documentation
- `semver-tests` — for changes to tests
- `semver-dependencies` — for updates to dependency versions
- `semver-performance` — for performance improvements

[link_zenodo]: https://github.com/datalad/datalad/blob/master/.zenodo.json
[contrib_emoji]: https://allcontributors.org/docs/en/emoji-key
